how's it going everybody it's me she
says from boundary break and you're
watching a cup head episode now if
you've never seen boundary break before
it's a show where we basically take the
camera anywhere we want and we try to
find secrets and new discoveries to some
of our favorite games now before we get
on to that there are people behind the
scenes making these episodes possible
this week the camera was made by a dirac
SIA they do some really cool stuff on
Twitter some of the things that I really
appreciate is that they show you what is
getting rendered in at what times before
a level or a frame gets loaded in and if
you're interested in that order the
YouTube channel you know just check out
the video description down below you can
get a look of what I'm talking about and
I want to just give a quick shout out to
Kane zantetsuken this is who I believe
was the first person ever make a cup
head camera unfortunately there was
compatibility issues and that's where
anorexia comes in but I still tip my hat
to you sir but anyways with all that
said I just want to show you guys some
really cool stuff that I managed to find
out of bounds in cup n let's get started
now there is a lot to be said about the
production of this game and we're gonna
cover that but first I want to start
with the basics in the tutorial here you
can see there's a point in which you're
supposed to be able to practice reviving
another character taking the camera
underneath the stage can show you that
there is a second cup head that seems to
die endlessly to be able to produce that
ghost slowing down the footage here can
show you a couple frames of animation
while cuphead is still alive now you've
already might notice that in some scenes
that you've seen in this episode there
is no film brain well I know that feels
like heresy to a lot of cuphead fans I
get it but for this episode there's
going to be a lot of zoom outs and so
for clarity's sake we found a way to
remove that filter it just makes the
detail that much more crisp when you
zoom it out like for example this
running gun section if it was with film
grain it would just be that much harder
to see the outlines of all the small
characters that are now at this point
very far away but I wanted to go back to
that starting area now it's not gonna be
animated here this is because these are
rendered frames but here's what the
scene looks like with the top layer that
kind of covers over the well detailed
background and here's what it looks like
without by the way this just happened
mid production something very incredible
is just taking place I reached out to
the guys at studio AMD HR to see if
they'd be able to answer a couple of
questions just to kind of add some
accuracy to the episode and Tina who is
one of the 2d animators on the team
reached out which I'm very thankful for
so what happened was I
a bunch of questions and then various
members from the team started answering
them which is something I've never seen
before so thank you guys at studio mvhr
all of you I'll make sure that all of
your Twitter handles are shown on the
screen as we talk about some of the
stuff that you guys explained so again
thanks a lot and with that said well the
questions I had was I was wondering if
these backgrounds were done completely
physically or if there was some digital
touch-ups I know there's some
information here and there that kind of
shows that there was some physicality
involved I just wanted to be sure
and so the person responsible for all
these backgrounds Caitlin Russell
responded herself by saying the
backgrounds are completely painted in
water color and then scanned and so by
that account some of these brush strokes
that you see here outside the boundaries
are real watercolor brush strokes that
isn't to say that some stuff wasn't done
digitally the frame-by-frame animation
starts off with real life sketches as
shown here but then afterwards it's
scanned into the computer and the
coloring is done digitally on Photoshop
and so with all that in mind I want to
show you guys grim matchstick he's
featured in this behind the scenes video
and you can see how he starts off with
his tail in the sketching process and
then he loses most of it later on as the
artists start to understand that most of
his tails not gonna be shown in the
actual game and so to save just a little
bit of time he'll see that the nub on
his tail just goes all over the place
now the reason why it goes all over the
place and you're gonna see lots of
examples as this as we go through the
episode is that the consistency only
matters for what's on screen what's off
screen here is just a rounded point
stuff that the artist can use a fill
tool and just do one easy click to make
the entire portion that the artist
wanted that one color but like I said
the nub remains just to make the process
a little bit faster for the artist let's
talk about some of the things that were
hidden by layers we got captain briny
beard here now I figured that this was
all just one giant drawing but I was
mistaken by that this footage proves
that he's on a separate layer from the
boat and by removing the boat you can
see that he has two peg legs something
that is completely obscured at all times
here's something that's kind of weird
about the shark so you can see that
there's the shark fin that goes off into
the background at first and then the
shark shows up on the dock now for
whatever reason at a certain point shark
fin attaches itself to the shark giving
him two fins technically but the
background element fin seems travel with
the separate shark model as he finally
leaves the screen and what's really cool
for one the transformation scenes for
the boat the accidentally left in a lot
of information about the animation cells
in the far right hand corner you can see
various words like whale boat 16 BWI 5
BW i7 BWI 11 15 17 22 and then it says
here whale boat 8 ACL jaw fix 2 out of 3
now what does this acronym stand for
what does this number mean to answer
that we had to go and ask the team and
with Tina being one of the animators of
course she was up first and it turned
out she was not the person who animated
that scene so she passed the question
off to Jay Clarke who is also a lead
animator on cuphead Jake then said that
he was also not responsible for this so
he threw his guess at either Chad or smo
motion now it's looking like it was Chad
who animated the scene can't know for
sure but we now know that smo motion was
also not the person who edited this
particular part of the game however
since I wasn't able to get ahold of Chad
we got a general explanation from some
emotions and dip up what he said here on
Twitter he said to my eye that looks
like a frame number not an animation
chart specifically the letters would
likely be the animator designated to the
specific action to keep their paper
straight looks like they even wrote in
the second frame boat whale Idol bwi
then the frame number so bwi stands for
boat whale Idol most likely and the
numbers that are penned here look like
they're the sequential order of each
frame anyways here's a run-and-gun stage
here and zooming out the camera just
even a little bit can show you the
canvas that these backdrops are made
from you can even see where the strokes
end it's really cool but moving a little
bit further ahead you can see
woodpeckers that are supposed to attack
cuphead and moving the camera out can
show you that it's just a neck it's not
much more than that but you're gonna
find out you a lot of and cuphead the
team here really knew what they were
doing when they decide to work in
certain characters and enemies that just
have parts of them show up in the stage
and much much further ahead at the top
of the tree you have these characters
that hold up a little lease for you if
you stand on them they get shot by
something and then they fall down taking
the camera all the way out and I know
that's a little bit hard for you guys to
see what's going on here you can see
that the enemy drops all the way down
here and then it deliberately travels
all the way back up and what's even more
fascinating is that it turns out that if
we were to drop down
there with them there is an invisible
surface that these characters land on
which I have to imagine serves as a
trigger for them to eventually go back
up and become platforms again now I want
to talk about a few weird things that I
managed to find out of bounds in the
mausoleums you have these ghosts here
that are trying to get to the urn and
they come from all sides of the walls
now when you pay in the camera out
there's a drawing from each part where
the ghosts seem to come from then this
is a bit unusual you don't really see
this in cuphead so I had to reach out
once again because I just want to know
what this unique drawing was meant to be
seen by the player at one point and
programmer Kezia Adamo and I hope to god
I am pronouncing that right and she said
there sprites from some other boss that
were meant to indicate spawn points for
the ghost and by doing it like this it
allowed the designers to move it around
and unity in any way that they wanted to
also got to ask her why exactly there
are some forms of the bosses stored out
of bounds you see it all over cuphead
here's a couple examples right here and
although it's not done in every single
instance it's done in a lot and she said
and I quote basically this just makes
them easier to switch in or out on the
fly it's better for memory management to
have the game objects instantiated at
the beginning of the scene which is
really really cool and here's a couple
things are outside the boundaries as
well now none of what I really found
here was completely unused like for
example here's a watercolour painting of
a seaport but this looks like a
duplicate of one that you can see
earlier in the stage over by the crabs
here another thing that was also out of
the bounds is this platform over on the
right here it's in the upper right hand
corner and it looks like it's a
propeller platform and it's never used
that is to say that this platform has
never used the family of platforms that
this belongs to is use later on this
stage while we're here let's also talk
about this ridiculousness going on with
the descent down the mountain now you
may have already noticed something a
little bit strange going on so let's
rewind it back and show you in-game
what's going on so you start at the top
of this mountain here and then there's
this platform that slides down the
mountain it all looks very organic and
you reach the bottom and then you're
just on your way but in truth if you
zoom the camera out you can see that the
platform nor the stages are really going
anywhere at all it's all an illusion the
backdrops and the roads creates an
animation that makes it look like you're
descending but you're just suspended in
place until the game finally decides to
push this piece of environment
below here a little bit upwards so that
it can make the connection now let's
talk more about layers it should be
stated that ataraxia donated a lot of
this footage here so I'm just gonna give
all credit to them and again links to
their stuff in the video description
down below so first off cuphead is very
charming I think that goes without
saying but part of that charm is that in
some scenes there are characters that
are just spying on you from another side
of a wall which involves layers first
one that I can think of is this troll
that eventually chases after you he's
just mean mugging you through this hole
in the wall and as you start going
through the platforms start chasing
after you and by the way here's a zoom
out of his entire body and it's pretty
funny because he has a perfect circle
going on down there now I was just about
to give all credit towards anorexia but
let's be honest here this is some
hodgepodge stuff that I wasn't able to
get good footage for so I'm just gonna
take the vault for this one we have our
editor Mike kind of zoom in all the way
at the bottom of this footage here you
can see that's just the head of the
troll
there's no shoulders or anything quite
like that the animators went for the
trouble of making a separate head model
just for that one little scene but then
they did something similar with the cat
as well at a certain point you can see
the cat looking through another hole in
the wall but removing the layer that
covers up this little scene you can see
that's just the head of the cat but the
head of the cat is completely drawn also
just for fun we can show how the rest of
the scene is rendered in here and it
even reveals that there are layers to
boss characters as well with things like
the inside of the can coming in first
then with the contraption going over
that with the plank of wood holding it
up and what the wheels being added last
I'll show you one more
we got doctor calls robot and we're
gonna show you what the whole scene
looks like as it's getting rendered in
first you start with the sunset
background then you start to add in the
skyline and you start to add in the city
buildings three layers of them in fact
then we got the clouds then the fence
then the gavage the machinery for the
garbage more garbage and that we're
actually getting into the action here
and with the robot it starts with the
base and then it adds a hand then the
torso then some color for the vent and
some color for the shutter on his
stomach and it looks like the opening
for the shutter is overlaid over the
shutter itself then the head is added
then the arm then the closed piece on
his chest and lastly the little zappy do
on his head alright let's start doing
some zoom outs of the hub environm
now there are three sections to cuphead
and it would appear that the entire map
of cuphead is not loaded all at once I
imagine it eats up a lot of memory to
have all the things there all at once
but it is interesting to note that when
you load a section of the map all the
characters and all the animations that
go with this scene are all loaded at
once
nothing is called out to save on
resources here so here's a good Zuma of
the first map
[Music]
and here's a good zoom out of the second
map but here's something really cool
about the second map there's a little
bit left over of the third map that's
out of bounds and if you look at the
spots where there should be buildings
animated for the third map you can see
that the artists left white canvases for
the animators to put in place and again
it's great because you can see these
sketchy lines and watermarks and
brushstrokes that bleed into the white
part of the canvas and lastly here is a
zoom out of the third area thank you so
much to manna Steven Olsen and the
unknown gamer for being incredibly
generous with donations to help support
the show it's difficult times for ad
revenue folks if you want to help it's a
good time to do it
patreon link is in the video description
down below thank you so much to the team
from cuphead as well as adder axia take
care
[Music]